Proposal:

Predicting Gender through Stylistic Analysis

The goal for our project is to create a learning model that predicts
whether a piece of text represents the words of a woman or a man.
Besides being an interesting intellectual exercise, this could give
some interesting insights into how the use of language differs across
gender, and whether those differences tend to be stable in the works
of different authors.

Our intent is to begin with the works of William Shakespeare -- using
the database at opensourceshakespeare.org as our data source -- to
build text classification methods capable of determining the gender of
Shakespeare’s characters from their word usage, and possibly other
aspects of their language (sentence length, speech length, etc.).
Shakespeare’s characters are an interesting starting point for this
project of categorization because they present a wide range of
canonical and highly influential male and female voices. We can easily
search for and aggregate the speeches of particular characters, label
them as either male or female, and then apply machine learning
techniques such as regression analysis to train our classification
algorithm to recognize salient features. Research by Argamon, Koppel
et al. has shown that this approach is capable of achieving
classification accuracy in the neighborhood of 60%. We may also
consider using unsupervised learning techniques such as clustering to
attempt to find groupings of speeches with similar features, in order
to get ideas of what to include in our regression analysis.

If our model turns out to be successful in classifying Shakespearean
characters according to gender, we can extend it to the works of other
authors. Particularly interesting would be whether a model trained to
identify the gender of characters by a single author such as
Shakespeare could be capable of identifying the gender of an author
him- or herself. There is research by Argamon et al. showing that
noticeable differences exist between male and female writers in
today’s world across a variety of texts. If our model is able to
detect these with some accuracy and classify the author’s gender
appropriately, that would suggest that the same stylistic differences
exist in the speeches of Shakespeare’s male and female characters.
This would be an impressive result, given the length of time that has
passed since his plays were written, and it might suggest some
fundamental differences in the ways males and females use language.
Additionally, we may consider training a classifier on Shakespeare
text and seeing how it performs on more modern texts and vice-versa in
order to better understand how gender norms as depicted in fiction
have changed over time and how our models might be limited by
temporality.
